---
layout: post
title: "5 Pound Auction Game and Introduction to the class"
tags:
  - about
  - assessment
---

In today's class I auctioned a five pound note and discussed how the class
works.

After getting the School's attendance QR code thing to work (please get in touch
if you have any trouble!) I auctioned a five pound note with the following
caveat:

> The top two bids would have to pay.

Frank and Tom immediately **and almost** simultaneously (this is important, more
about that later) bid:

- Frank bid £0.10;
- Tom bid £4.90 (I actually changed his first bid which was £4.99).

This was followed by Sam bidding £5.00.

At this point Tom is trapped:

- If Tom bids he would pay £5.10 for £5.00 "making": "-£0.10"
- If Tom does not bid he would pay £4.90 for nothing "making": "-£4.90"

So Tom should bid (which he did).

Sam is of course in a similar trap where the sunken cost of his first bid
implies that he should keep bidding.

I stopped this and told Sam and Tom to split the money (apparently Sam is yet to
get his due!) but the point I wanted to make here is what Game Theory tries to
do which is **to understand the emergent outcomes when individuals do what is
best for themselves**.

You can find a picture of the board
[here]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/2025-2026/boards/2029-09-2029/main.jph)

At the end of class Tom, Felix and I had a chat and Tom explained that he had
actually intended to bid £4.99 **first**. This explains his (awesome)
enthusiasm. If he hadn't bid at the same time as someone else and had indeed
managed to be the **sole** bidder at the highest possible price then it would
have probably been somewhat obvious that no one else should enter the trap.
**This is the first time someone has done that, next year I'll probably set a
lowest starting bid.**

**Class Structure, Delivery and Assessment.**

After all that we spent some time talking about the class itself.

We spoke about the general structure of the class and you can find that
information here: [https://vknight.org/gt/topics/about-the-course.html](https://vknight.org/gt/topics/about-the-course.html).

---

ACTION REQUIRED:

If you do not have a group by the end of Saturday the 11 of September I will
create a group for you.

Add your group members to a group on learning central. I believe it's easy to
find and do but let me know if you cannot find it and/or if I have not set
things up right.

---

In class I said the assessment was 80% exam: **I was wrong** the exam is
actually 75%. Apologies for this and thanks to the student who came up to me to
double check consistency with what SIMS was saying.
